---
layout: page
title: "Depression in the 21st Century: How it feels to be stomped by this Tall Bad Thing."
tags: test psychology
---

> _Stomp! Stomp! Stomp! is the buzzing sound of depression in our modern time. What Frankensteined this Monster?_ <br />

## How depression?

Depression is a 16-feet tall monster; large and menacing that anyone or anything beside it becomes but insignificantly irrelevant. If you are unfortunate to be captured by this monster, He grabs you by the head; stares into your innocent eye—unaware of what is about to happen—and slips you forcefully beneath its feet—letting out a mischievous laugh. As if that is not enough, He starts stomping on your every bone, body, and, blood; again and again like you're something of an insect or an undesirable bug. If you've not been captured by this monster then you may not understand. Bugs know best the emotion they feel.

David Foster Wallace was such bug. He was an American writer and university Professor of English and Creative writing. His novel, _Infinite Jest_, is considered to be so good that it is listed as one of the 100 best English-language novels published between 1923 and 2005. Despite a promising career, on September 12th of 2008—after many years of being wickedly and unnecessarily stomped—he took his own life. His wife, Karen Green, came home to find that he had hanged himself on the courtyard of their house, in Claremont, California. Although he barely wrote about his mental illness, David Wallace wrote an account of his depression when he was alive and younger. To subjectively understand how it feels be depressed, the topic will be scrutinized through the lens of creative writers that were bugs too. Writers (and artists alike) interpret the world for us. They articulate empathetically the world's vicissitudes and remind us of who we are and what it is to be human.

A particularly good account of Foster Wallace's depresson is documented in his 1984 novelette: _"The Planet Trillaphon as it stands in relation to the Bad Thing"_ In it, He describes the feeling of depression as being completely and utterly sick to every cell of the body. He wrote,

> "I'm not incredibly glib, but I'll tell what I think the Bad Thing is like. To me it's like being completely, totally, utterly sick. I will try to explain what I mean. Imagine feeling really sick to your stomach. Almost everyone has felt really sick to his or her stomach, so everyone knows what it's like: it's less than fun. OK. OK. But that feeling is localized: it's more or less just your stomach. Imagine your whole body being sick like that: your feet, the big muscles in your legs, your collarbone, your head, your hair, everything, all just as sick as a fluey stomach. Then, If you can imagine that, please imagine it even more spread out and total. Imagine that every cell in your body, every single cell in your body is as sick as that nauseated stomach. Not just your own cells, even, but the e. coli and lactobacilli in you, too, the mitochondria, basal bodies, all sick and boiling and hot like maggots in your neck, your brain. all over, everywhere, in everything. All just _sick_ as hell. Now imagine that every single _atom_ in every single cell in your body is sick like that, sick, intolerably sick. And every proton and neutron in every atom... swollen and throbbing, off-color, sick, with just no chance of throwing up to relieve the feeling. Every electron is sick, here, twirling off balance and all erratic in these funhouse orbitals that are just thick and swirling with mottled yellow and purple poison gases, everything off balance and woozy. Quarks and neutrinos out of their minds and bouncing sick all over the place, bouncing like crazy. Just imagine that, a sickness spread utterly through every bit of you, even the bits of the bits. So that your very... very _essence_ is characterized by nothing other than the feature of sickness; you and the sickness are, as they say, "one.""

David Wallace is here trying as much as possible to brutally describe his subjective feeling of depression; Explaining that stomach pain is not fun but is yet dwarfed by this 16 feet tall and menacing monster. Just one stomp ricochets through the body to the bones and blood like stretched-and-released rubber; that every tissue and cell and atom down to its elements vibrates vigorously despite the apparent lack of energy. Now imagine one stomp is not enough but one after another and another that it is so fast it makes a buzzing stomping sound continously, never-ending. Now, that, is pain perpetual.
In his book, _The Depressed Person_, he tells the story of a nameless—seeming insignificant—girl in "terrible and unceasing emotional pain, and the impossibility of sharing or articulating this pain was itself a component of the pain and a contributing factor in its essential horror"
He attempts to lock the reader in the same cell as the Depressed Person. She is someone who is buried so deeply under her own sadness and anxiety that nothing that happens to her can have any meaning except in the context of her illness. Even simple exchanges risk sending her into a tailspin:

> "The former acquaintances and classmates who composed her Support System often told the depressed person that they just wished she could be a little less hard on herself, to which the depressed person responded by bursting involuntarily into tears and telling them that she knew all too well that she was one of those dreaded types of everyone’s grim acquaintance who call at inconvenient times and just go on and on about themselves."

Language can communicate only so much, something that is entirely subjective. Depression is a disorder. It is also a mood which is often sadness that wears off after a few days. As a disorder, it is something much worse. Something that feels perpetual only made mild with antidepressants.

## Why depression?

To attempt to understand the causes of depression locally, i.e, by studying the source of depression in an individual, we hit a hard wall because depression—in a sense—is sadness that has forgotten its true causes – forgotten because remembering may generate overwhelming, untenable feelings of pain and loss. A better approach will be to understand its causes globally. Why depression? Is it a disease of our time? Of Civilization or Modernity? Or is it etched into our genes?

On a microscale, depression is associated with a few things: the abnormal transmission or depletion of certain neurotransmitters, especially serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine, blunted circadian rhythms, or specific changes in the REM and slow-wave parts of your sleep cycle, and hormone abnormalities, such as high cortisol and deregulation of thyroid hormones. But neuroscientists still don't have a complete picture of what causes depression. It seems to be due to the complex interaction between genes, our environment, and society. Since our genes is not something we can easily manipulate at will, our focus should be on our society and environment. What about our environment and society fosters depression?

In the highlands of _Papua New Guinea_, _The Kaluli_ people lay their stead. An Anthropologist, Edward Shieffelin was curious as to how often the Kaluli people experience the same kind of mental illness that we do. And so, He spent over a decade among them. He interviewed over 2000 members of the Kaluli, and extensively queried them for their experience of Clinical depression. At the end of his study, he found there was just one marginal case of depresssion out of the 2000 Kalulis he interviwed! That is a rate hundred times lower than the recorded usual. Although the Kalulis live really hard lives reflected in their high rates of infant mortality due to parasitic infections and violent deaths, they don't become clinically depressed. Interestingly, the shield that makes them immune to this menacing monster we call depression is all built up in their lifestyle.

Specifically, the Kaluli live a lifestyle very similar to that of our ancestors over the entire Pleistocene epoch that lasted for 1.8 million years. They live as hunter-gatherers; In the absence of all the perks of modern life. There has been a radical environment mutation so fast that our genes, body and brains can't keep up– a sort of mismatch between our genes, body, brain and the world that we find ourselves in. We were never designed for the sedentary, indoor, socially isolated, sleep-deprived, fast-food-laden, frenzied pace of modern life.

There are 6 particular features of modernity that have this psychologically disturbing effect:
> Meritocracy; Individualism; Secularism; Romanticism; The Media; Perfectibilty

**Meritocracy:** Our societies beat into our psyche the fact that everyone is free to _"make it"_ if they have the talent and energy. Unfortunately, with this apparently beautiful fact forged into our minds, we cant help but feel definite laziness or a lack of talent if the promised success is not close at hand; a musing akin to: "If those at the top deserve all their success, then those at the bottom must surely deserve all their failure." A society that thinks of itself as meritocratic turns poverty from a problem to evidence of damnation and those who have failed from unfortunates to losers. 

**Individualism:** An individualistic society advocates that everyone is capable of a special destiny; that the individual and his achievements are everything. It says the community doesn't matter and to be ordinary is a curse. The result of is

For David Foster Wallace, his depression started out as hallucinations. He thought that a huge wound, a really huge and deep wound, had opened on his face, on his cheek near his nose. As he put it: "...that the skin had just split open like old fruit, that blood was seeping out, all dark and shiny, that veins and bits of yellow cheek-fat and red-gray muscle were plainly visible, even bright flashes of bone, in there. Whenever I’d look in the mirror, there it would be, that wound, and I could feel the twitch of the exposed muscle and the heat of the blood on my cheek, all the time. But when I’d say to a doctor or to Mom or to other people, “Hey, look at this open wound on my face, I’d better go to the hospital,” they’d say, “Well, hey, there’s no wound on your face, are your eyes OK?"..."

We may not know exactly what fueled the sad suicide story of Professor David Foster Wallace. It could have been his genes. It could have been the society he found himself in. We are just not sure. What we do know is that our Society is to blame. Our Society Frankensteined this Monster with 6 evil ingredients: a face and head of The Media; a torso of Individualism; two arms of Meritocracy and Secularism; two Legs of Perfectibilty and Romanticism all pounding and pounding and pounding; stomping and stomping and stomping: A never-ending buzz of pain...